doc: Trust model personas (#24)
confidential-containers/documentation: TrustModel_Personas.md

  orchestration components and by the workload.
- Have control over TEE hardware availability/type
- Responsibility for applying firmware updates to infrastructure including the TEE Technology.

Example : Cloud Service Provider (CSP) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Site Reliability Engineer
(SRE)

### Orchestration Operator
This persona has privileges within the Orchestration/Cluster.
They are responsible for deploying a solution into a particular cloud native environment and 
managing the orchestration environment.
For managed cluster this would also include the administration of the cluster control plane.
- control availability of service
- control webhooks and deployment of workloads
- control availability to workload of cluster resources (data/networking/storage) and cluster 
  services (Logging/Monitoring/Load Balancing)
- control the deployment of boot images initially required by the TEE during initialisation. 
 These boot images once initialised will receive the workload.

Example : A kubernetes administrator responsible for deploying pods to a cluster and 
maintaining the cluster.

### Workload Provider

> This persona develops and builds the code, containers and pods intended to provide the 

Reviewer: I think this persona may be two separate personas.
There is one persona which creates and runs the solution. And I think a separate persona which creates one or more container images used in the solution. There is an important security relationship between them for our model. 
Specifically, the container image publisher signs and/or encrypts the image. 
The workload provider/owner/operator must trust the signature of the publisher and/or be authorized to decrypt the image.

Author: I agree that this Workload Provider is perhaps a summary persona, My intention is to submit a pull request once this one is merged which will look into the pipeline behind providing the workload, relating it the CNCF model and also starting to discuss where setting up attestation flows fits .
So I am keen not to break up the Workload Provider into more personas in this PR but I am happy to perhaps highlight fact that behind the workload provider sit multiple personas that fulfill the actions listed?
If that helps?

Reviewer: I think recognizing at least one degree of separation is fundamental to our security model and should be defined up front. If we set aside the potentially complex set of actors in k8s we still have a message (a container image) which is signed and/or encrypted. And there are usually at least two parties, the signer and the verifier (and similarly an actor that encrypts and one that decrypts).

Because a workload may be a composition of multiple container images from multiple authors there is a further complication. I'm not concerned about defining that upfront as much as being clear about this distinction of who signs/encrypts an individual container and who verifies/decrypts an individual container.

Author: OK I see what you mean, 
I want to keep the personas for this level of documentation to be larger grained, but I agree that opening the door to the distinction between who signs/verifies and who encrypts makes a lot of sense. It also helps setup the more detailed conversations and exploration of threats to come.
So I have reworked things a little and introduced the container image provider persona to help explore this separation of signing/encrypting from verifying. Hopefully this captures the point you were making?

data confidentiality.
The workload provider must not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator  
otherwise they risk losing the trust of the data owner. This means the workload provider must 
provide assurance to the data owner regarding the integrity of the code and that the data is 
appropriately protected, the workload provider may also wish to maintain confidentiality of 
their code from other personas.

In general the TEE boundary must correspond with the most restrictive Trust boundary between 
the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator.

Outside the TEE we distinguish between the Orchestration Operator and the Infrastructure 
Operator due to nature of how they can impact the TEE and the concerns of Workload Provider and 
Data Owner. Direct threats exist from the Orchestration Operator as some orchestration actions  
must be permitted to cross the TEE boundary otherwise orchestration cannot occur. A key goal is to 
*deprivilege orchestration* and put a persona inside the TEE boundary in control of the 
orchestration operators privileges across the boundary. However indirect threats exist 

> from the Infrastructure Operator who would not be permitted to exercise orchestration apis but  

Reviewer: nit api/API
```suggestion
from the Infrastructure Operator who would not be permitted to exercise orchestration APIs but  
```

Author: Thanks done.

> could exploit the low level hardware or firmware capabilities to access or impact the  contents 

Reviewer: nit whitespace
```suggestion
could exploit the low level hardware or firmware capabilities to access or impact the contents 
```

Author: done thanks

data (data encryption) is not provided simply by using a TEE.

Recognising that Data Owner and Workload Provider are separate personas helps us to 
identify threats to both data and workload independently and to recognise that any solution must 
consider the potential independent nature of these personas.
Two examples of trust between Data Owner and Workload Provider are :
- AI Models which are proprietary and protected requires the workload to be encrypted and not 
  shared with the Data Owner. In this case secrets private to the workload provider are needed 
  to access the workload, secrets requiring access to the data are provided by the data owner 
  while trusting the workload/model without having direct access to how the workload functions. 
  The data owner completely trusts the workload and workload provider, whereas the workload 
  provider does not trust the data owner with the full details of their workload.
- Data Owner verifies and approves certain versions of a workload, the workload provides the 
  data owner with secrets in order to fulfil this. These secrets are available in the TEE for 

>   use by the Data Owner to verify the workload, once achieved the data owner will then provides 

Reviewer: nit /will provides/will provide
```suggestion
  use by the Data Owner to verify the workload, once achieved the data owner will then provide
```

  secrets and data into the TEE for use by the workload in full confidence of what the workload 
  will do with their data. The data owner will independently verify versions of the workload and 
  will only trust specific versions of the workload with the data whereas the workload provider 
  completely trusts the data owner.

We do not draw a distinction between data owner and end user though we do recognise that in 

> some cases these may not be identical . For example data may be provided to a workload to allow 

Reviewer: nit / ./.
```suggestion
some cases these may not be identical. For example data may be provided to a workload to allow 
```

Author: done thanks

> analysis and results to be made available ot an end user. The original data is never provided 

Reviewer: nit /ot/to
```suggestion
analysis and results to be made available to an end user. The original data is never provided 
```

Author: done thanks

# Trust Model Considerations - Personas

## Personas
Otherwise referred to as actors or threat agents, these are individuals or groups capable of 
carrying out a particular threat. 
In identifying personas we consider :
- The Runtime Environment, Figure 5, Page 20 of CNCF 

>   [Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-Nov2020.pdf).

Author: Thanks, updated

  This highlights three layers, Cloud/Environment, Workload Orchestration, Application.
- The Kubernetes 
  [Overview of Cloud Native Security](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/overview/)
  identifies the 4C's of Cloud Native 
  Security as Cloud, Cluster, Container and Code. However data is core to confidential 
  containers rather than code.
- The Confidential Computing Consortium paper 
  [A Technical Analysis of Confidential Computing v1.1](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2021/03/CCC-Tech-Analysis-Confidential-Computing-V1.pdf)
 defines Confidential Computing as the protection of data in use by performing computation in a 
  hardware-based Trusted Execution Environment (TEE).

In considering personas we recognise that a trust boundary exists between each persona and we
explore how the least privilege principle (as described on Page 36 of

>   [Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-Nov2020.pdf)

Author: Thanks updated

firmware used to provide compute, network and storage to the Cloud Native solution
They are responsible for availability of infrastructure used by the cloud native environment.
- Have access to the physical hardware.
- Have access to the processes involved in the deployment of compute/storage/memory used by any 
  orchestration components and by the workload.
- Have control over TEE hardware availability/type
- Responsibility for applying firmware updates to infrastructure including the TEE Technology.

Example : Cloud Service Provider (CSP) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Site Reliability Engineer
(SRE)

### Orchestration Operator
This persona has privileges within the Orchestration/Cluster.
They are responsible for deploying a solution into a particular cloud native environment and 
managing the orchestration environment.
For managed cluster this would also include the administration of the cluster control plane.
- control availability of service
- control webhooks and deployment of workloads
- control availability to workload of cluster resources (data/networking/storage) and cluster 
  services (Logging/Monitoring/Load Balancing)

> - control the deployment of boot images initially required by the TEE during initialisation. 

Author: Thanks, I was a bit limiting in only specifying boot images, changed this as you suggested

 These boot images once initialised will receive the workload.

Example : A kubernetes administrator responsible for deploying pods to a cluster and 
maintaining the cluster.

### Workload Provider
This persona develops, builds and defines the solution, pods and containers intended to provide 

> the Application or Workload which in turn provides value to the data owners (customers and clients).

Reviewer: Thanks for adding the Container Image Provider section!

A couple thoughts to work in now or in a subsequent PR...
Now that we have the Container Image Provider, we can cull some scope from the Workload Provider.

> This persona designs and creates the kubernetes objects comprising the solution. Those objects reference containers published by Container Image Providers. In some cases the Workload and Container Image Providers may be the same entity. 

i.e. the workload provider doesn't develop and build the containers since that is now in the role of the container provider.

Author: Agree and made some changes along the line of your suggestion - Thanks

The workload provider and data owner could be part of same company/organisation but 
following the least privilege principle the application provider should not be able to view or 
manipulate end user data without informed consent.

> - Owner of business logic containers. These may contain proprietary algorithms, models or secrets

Reviewer: These are now the owned by the Container Image Provider

Author: Moved to Container Image Provider.

- Need to prove to customer aspects of compliance.
- Defines what the solution requires in order to run and maintain compliance (resources, utility 
  containers/services,  storage).
- Defines the method of verifying the container images to be used and provides artifacts to 

>   allow verification to be completed within the TEE.

Reviewer: I think this now belongs to the Container Image Provider

Author: I can see what you mean, I think there needs to be aspects under both personas.
The Container Image Provider can define what methods are available
The workload Provider can choose the methods they will use.

There may be more than one supported or indeed the workload provider may choose to avoid certain Image Providers because they do not support the desired verification method.

- provide the boot images initially required by the TEE during 
  initialisation or designates a trusted party to do so.
- provide the attestation verification service, or designate a trusted party to provide the 
  attestation verification service.

Example : 3rd party software vendor, cloud solution provider

### Container Image Provider

This persona is responsible for the part of the supply chain that builds container images and 
provides them for use by the solution. Since a workload can 
be composed of multiple containers, there may be multiple container image providers, some 
will be closely connected to the workload provider (business logic containers), others more 
independent to the workload provider (side car containers). The container image provider is expected
to use a mechanism to allow provenance of container image to be established when a 
workload pulls in these images at deployment time. This can take the form of signing or encrypting 
the container images.
- Builds container images
- Signs or encrypts the images

> - Provides the signature or public encryption keys securely to the workload provider by a trusted 

Reviewer: Update key terminology. (Suggested parenthetic on the second bullet might be too specific but those components are defined by our system.)
 
```suggestion
- Publishes the signature verification key (public key).
- Provides any decryption keys through a secure channel (generally to a key management system controlled by a Key Broker Service).
```

Author: Yes I like splitting this out , I added a third point to cover any more generic things beyond keys and the images

  channel.
- Protects the keys used to sign or encrypt the container images

It is recognised that hybrid options exist surrounding workload provider and container provider. 
For example the workload provider may choose to protect their supply chain by 
signing/encrypting their own container images after following the build patterns already 
established by the container image provider. 

Example : Sidecar Container Provider

### Data Owner
Owner of data used, and manipulated by the application.
- concerned with visibility and integrity of their data.
- concerned with compliance and protection of their data.
- uses and shares data with solutions. 
- least privilege principle means no visibility or manipulation of data is possible by 
  Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

## Conclusion

The key trust relationship here is between the Data Owner and the other personas. The Data Owner 

> trusts the code provided by the workload provider to operate across their data, however they do 

Reviewer 2: with the `container image providers` the code is now provided by them?

Author: :-) Good catch I added Container Image Provider but didn't consider the impact on the conclusion section. I updated a few things in this section to fix what you found above but also highlight the trust between the workload provider and the container image provider.

# Trust Model Considerations - Personas

## Personas
Otherwise referred to as actors or threat agents, these are individuals or groups capable of 
carrying out a particular threat. 

> In identifying personas we consider :

Author: The idea was to highlight this is about bringing the worlds of Confidential Computing and Cloud Native together hence clearly highlighting the mixture of sources used. But if there is a better structure happy to take input

> In identifying personas we consider :

Reviewer 3: Yeah I think these are good sources. I would put them at the end, but it's not a big deal.

- The Runtime Environment, Figure 5, Page 19 of CNCF 
  [Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf).
  This highlights three layers, Cloud/Environment, Workload Orchestration, Application.
- The Kubernetes 
  [Overview of Cloud Native Security](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/overview/)
  identifies the 4C's of Cloud Native 
  Security as Cloud, Cluster, Container and Code. However data is core to confidential 
  containers rather than code.
- The Confidential Computing Consortium paper 
  [A Technical Analysis of Confidential Computing v1.1](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2021/03/CCC-Tech-Analysis-Confidential-Computing-V1.pdf)
 defines Confidential Computing as the protection of data in use by performing computations in a 

>   hardware-based Trusted Execution Environment (TEE).

Author: From our conversation outside the PR I think we are surfacing a key difference that any Trust Model only works in the context of its Personas. 
And that since we are bringing the world of Trusted Execution Environments together with the world of Cloud Native we have two ways of viewing the Trust Model. This PR is very much intended to be on the path to Cloud Native Trust Model but I can see that another Trust Model could be more TEE focused and consider host owner, guest owner and end user as personas.
A TEE Focused Trust Model can certainly capture our initial conversations which came from the early discussions on the technology we are using. Perhaps this helps with initial development?
Whereas the Cloud Native Trust Model is less clear, requires more conversation but once there, will be the thing which sees us fit seamlessly into the Cloud Native ecosystem and gains us cloud native adopters/users.

I believe that Confidential Containers can improve the Confidential Computing Cloud Native Story, but I do not expect us to solve everything that a Cloud Native trust Model might highlight. Rather we improve on what exists today, identifying in cloud native terms the threats we can solve, the threats we cannot solve alone and the extensions to cloud native security and practices that should be in place to correctly use confidential containers to improve the conifdential computing story

Would it make sense to revisit [#28] and identify the need for a document which captures a TEE focused trust model?

In considering personas we recognise that a trust boundary exists between each persona and we
explore how the least privilege principle (as described on Page 40 of
  [Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf)
) should apply to any actions which cross these boundaries.

 Confidential containers can provide enhancements to ensure that the expected code/containers 

>  are the only code that can operate over the data. However any vulnerabilities within this code 

Author: Perhaps there is more discussion to have relating to the issue "Document Trust Model Concepts" [#28] . this PR is intended to advance the cloud native concepts to include consideration of a TEE boundary. the issue highlights further PRs which are intended to cover further concepts, which then get combined into Cloud Native Trust Model. 
This PR is not intended to be a complete Trust Model, just to cover the Cloud Native Personas and show where the TEE boundary sits for them.

 are not mitigated by using confidential containers, the Cloud Native Security Whitepaper 
 details Lifecycle aspects that relate to the security of the code being placed into containers 

>  such as Static/Dynamic Analysis, Security Tests, Code Review etc which must still be followed. 

Author: As mentioned this isn't intended to be the complete trust model, it is intended to provide detail and understanding behind the Cloud Native Confidential Container Personas.

>  such as Static/Dynamic Analysis, Security Tests, Code Review etc which must still be followed. 

Author: Updated Issue #28 to reflect the additional need for a more TEE viewpoint on trust not just a cloud native viewpoint

>  such as Static/Dynamic Analysis, Security Tests, Code Review etc which must still be followed. 

Reviewer: On my first read I took this paragraph as providing some helpful context for the reader.
Given @fitzthum feedback though, I'm fine cutting the paragraph in order to provide a more concise reading of the personas topic.

independent to the workload provider (side car containers). The container image provider is expected
to use a mechanism to allow provenance of container image to be established when a 
workload pulls in these images at deployment time. This can take the form of signing or encrypting 
the container images.
- Builds container images.
- Owner of business logic containers. These may contain proprietary algorithms, models or secrets.
- Signs or encrypts the images.
- Defines the methods available for verifying the container images to be used.
- Publishes the signature verification key (public key).
- Provides any decryption keys through a secure channel (generally to a key management system 
  controlled by a Key Broker Service).
- Provides other required verification artifacts (secure channel may be considered).
- Protects the keys used to sign or encrypt the container images.

It is recognised that hybrid options exist surrounding workload provider and container provider. 
For example the workload provider may choose to protect their supply chain by 
signing/encrypting their own container images after following the build patterns already 

> established by the container image provider. 

Author: I think you hit on the reasons why these are concerns for CC since we need features/services which will help. Again the intention here was to try and stick with personas not artifacts/services etc which will be in different PR.
Key goal to try and get a good cadence of merging PR's and continually moving the Cloud Native trust Model discussion forwards.

> established by the container image provider. 

Reviewer: I think the relationships are directly relevant. Who is trusting whom and who is encrypting / signing. I recommend keeping this section.

Example : Sidecar Container Provider

### Data Owner
Owner of data used, and manipulated by the application.
- Concerned with visibility and integrity of their data.
- Concerned with compliance and protection of their data.
- Uses and shares data with solutions. 
- Wishes to ensure no visibility or manipulation of data is possible by 
  Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Discussion
```
Somewhat address @fitzthum feedback on "Conclusion". The following text is a discussion or analysis of the interaction between the personas.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Data Owner vs. All Other Personas

```

>   Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

Author: Yea the last point is not structured in similar manner
Changed to :
- Wishes to ensure no visibility or manipulation of data is possible by 
  Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

>   Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

Reviewer 3: ok nice

The key trust relationship here is between the Data Owner and the other personas. The Data Owner 
trusts the code in the form of container images chosen by the Workload Provider to operate across 
their data, however they do not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator with their 
data and wish to ensure data confidentiality.

> The Workload Provider must not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator otherwise 
> they risk losing the trust of the Data Owner. This means the Workload Provider must
> provide assurance to the data owner regarding the integrity of the code and that the data is 
> appropriately protected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Cut text for conciseness. This concept is somewhat redundant with other content below.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# Workload Provider vs. Container Image Provider

```

The Workload Provider is free to choose Container Image Providers that will provide not only 
the images they need but also support the verification method they require.  A key aspect to this
relationship is the Workload Provider applying Supply Chain 
Security practices (as 
described on Page 42 of
[Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf)
) when considering Container 
Image Providers. So the Container Image Provider must support the Workload Providers 
ability to provide assurance to the Data Owner regarding integrity of the code.

With Confidential Containers we match the TEE boundary to the most restrictive boundary which is 
between the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Orchestration Operator vs. Infrastructure Operator

```

> the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator.

Author: Bad punctuation I think but could be clearer anyway.
Changed to:
With Confidential Containers we match the TEE boundary to the most restrictive boundary which is 
between the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator.

> the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator.

Reviewer 3: ah yeah that makes more sense

Outside the TEE we distinguish between the Orchestration Operator and the Infrastructure 
Operator due to nature of how they can impact the TEE and the concerns of Workload Provider and 
Data Owner. Direct threats exist from the Orchestration Operator as some orchestration actions  

> must be permitted to cross the TEE boundary otherwise orchestration cannot occur. A key goal is to 
> *deprivilege orchestration* and put a persona inside the TEE boundary in control of the 
> orchestration operators privileges across the boundary. However indirect threats exist 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must be permitted to cross the TEE boundary otherwise orchestration cannot occur. A key goal is to 
*deprivilege orchestration* and restrict the 
Orchestration Operators privileges across the boundary. However indirect threats exist 
```
We don't really have a separate persona for this so I removed that text.

from the Infrastructure Operator who would not be permitted to exercise orchestration APIs but 
could exploit the low level hardware or firmware capabilities to access or impact the  contents 
of a TEE.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Workload Provider vs Data Owner

```

> of a TEE.

Author: Interesting area to explore, I believe the methods of attack and threats are different and considered differently by Cloud Native Users. A Managed Kubernetes offering v roll your own k8s on Infrastructure as a Service leads to very different considerations from users perspective in what threats they consider. One set of threats is due to how cloud native works and the cloud native security approaches used,  the other set is the underlying access to the hardware and provisioning used in the Cloud.

We could take this to the nth degree and as one person asked recently at Kubecon why do we trust the TEE Vendor? They could manipulate our basis of hardware trust.

> Inside the TEE we distinguish between the Workload Provider and Data Owner in recognition that 

Author: Changed to 
Inside the TEE we need to be able to distinguish between the Workload Provider and Data Owner

Again intention is this covers Personas and later PRs can draw on this content to explore the distinction.

- AI Models which are proprietary and protected requires the workload to be encrypted and not 
  shared with the Data Owner. In this case secrets private to the Workload Provider are needed 
  to access the workload, secrets requiring access to the data are provided by the Data Owner 
  while trusting the workload/model without having direct access to how the workload functions. 
  The Data Owner completely trusts the workload and Workload Provider, whereas the Workload
  Provider does not trust the Data Owner with the full details of their workload.
- Data Owner verifies and approves certain versions of a workload, the workload provides the 
  data owner with secrets in order to fulfil this. These secrets are available in the TEE for 
  use by the Data Owner to verify the workload, once achieved the data owner will then provide 
  secrets and data into the TEE for use by the workload in full confidence of what the workload 
  will do with their data. The Data Owner will independently verify versions of the workload and 
  will only trust specific versions of the workload with the data whereas the Workload Provider
  completely trusts the Data Owner.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Data Owner vs. End User
```

We do not draw a distinction between data owner and end user though we do recognise that in 
some cases these may not be identical. For example data may be provided to a workload to allow 
analysis and results to be made available to an end user. The original data is never provided 
directly to the end user but the derived data is, in this case the data owner can be different 

> from the end user and may wish to protect this data from the end user.

Author: Happy to take input on making this clearer. I would stress the previous comments that this PR is trying to fit the TEE boundary within Cloud Native focused personas so I wonder if this mismatch with your view on content is contributing to the lack of clarity.

> from the end user and may wish to protect this data from the end user.

Reviewer 3: I just think it's too long for a conclusion.

# Trust Model Considerations - Personas

## Personas

> Otherwise referred to as actors or threat agents, these are individuals or groups capable of 

Reviewer 4: I would have assumed that Trust Model Personas included not only threat agents, but also defense agents.

Reviewer 4: In particular, I think that having a persona owning the attestation servers is lacking in the current version of the document. As written today, it is the "Workload provider", but in practice, I see a very different persona between:

* Someone who wants to create an image for a workload (the Workload provider), essentially a developer, whose role is to ensure that the workload itself follows security best practices, but has little say with respect to how his workload is attested.
* Someone who sets up an attestation server (Attestation provider?) who is in charge of ensuring that the infrastructure running the attestation is safe, etc.

In a sense, it's the same distinction as between container and cloud, but applied to the attestation part. I hope this comment makes sense :-)

Author: I don’t see the existing personas as threat agents?
Just agents between which some trust is established?
So each persona can be considered a threat or a defence.

I do agree there are further distinctions we can make among personas but I am conscious of trying to create too many personas too soon. In this case how to introduce the persona relating specifically to the attestation servers for example before we have explained the role of the attestation server? (Chicken and Egg situations everywhere)

The Issue -> https://github.com/confidential-containers/documentation/issues/28 is my attempt to collate at a headline level the content to be reviewed and merged and the next item on this is to explore “Trust Model Artifacts/Components/Services” which will introduce the attestation server among other things.

I guess the open question here is how do we relate to security models which already exist and guide those familiar with existing security models into new personas and new artifacts so they can follow and understand our trust model?

Would you be OK to merge this PR as it is and add to the Issue [#28]  that we need to consider further personas such as around attestation server in further PR’s?

Reviewer 4: I don't object to merging the PR. I agree that this is a bit difficult to put the pieces together, and to find the correct order to do so.

You wrote "I don’t see the existing personas as threat agents?". If that is the case, maybe
```suggestion
Otherwise referred to as actors or agents, these are individuals or groups capable of 
```

carrying out a particular threat. 
In identifying personas we consider :
- The Runtime Environment, Figure 5, Page 19 of CNCF 
  [Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf).
  This highlights three layers, Cloud/Environment, Workload Orchestration, Application.
- The Kubernetes 
  [Overview of Cloud Native Security](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/overview/)
  identifies the 4C's of Cloud Native 

>   Security as Cloud, Cluster, Container and Code. However data is core to confidential 

Reviewer 4: The real difference confidential computing introduces is in-use data. Data at rest and in transit should be protected the usual way (even if we need to work on specific considerations like "how do we provide secure storage to the container").

Where do data at rest and data in transit fit in the existing security model? We should probably mimic that for data in-use.

Author: It isn't completely obvious to me yet how we bridge into the existing security model.
In the issue https://github.com/confidential-containers/documentation/issues/28 I try to capture the areas we need to explore specifically for confidential computing (data in use) and the intention in those is to draw on the models already defined within the security whitepaper - lifecycle being a key example. 

I do agree that a guiding consideration needs to be to look to mimic where data at rest and data in transit fit as far as sensible. Was there a specific idea for Personas or more something we need to be mindful off as we further explore content relating to Trust Model?

Reviewer 4: OK.

  containers rather than code.
- The Confidential Computing Consortium paper 
  [A Technical Analysis of Confidential Computing v1.1](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2021/03/CCC-Tech-Analysis-Confidential-Computing-V1.pdf)

>  defines Confidential Computing as the protection of data in use by performing computation in a 

Reviewer 4: computation -> computations?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 defines Confidential Computing as the protection of data in use by performing computations in a 
```

### Infrastructure Operator
This persona has privileges within the Cloud Infrastructure which includes the hardware and 
firmware used to provide compute, network and storage to the Cloud Native solution
They are responsible for availability of infrastructure used by the cloud native environment.
- Have access to the physical hardware.
- Have access to the processes involved in the deployment of compute/storage/memory used by any 
  orchestration components and by the workload.
- Have control over TEE hardware availability/type
- Responsibility for applying firmware updates to infrastructure including the TEE Technology.

Example : Cloud Service Provider (CSP) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Site Reliability Engineer
(SRE)

### Orchestration Operator
This persona has privileges within the Orchestration/Cluster.
They are responsible for deploying a solution into a particular cloud native environment and 
managing the orchestration environment.
For managed cluster this would also include the administration of the cluster control plane.
- control availability of service
- control webhooks and deployment of workloads

> - control availability to workload of cluster resources (data/networking/storage) and cluster 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Control availability of cluster resources (data/networking/storage) and cluster
```

>   services (Logging/Monitoring/Load Balancing)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  services (Logging/Monitoring/Load Balancing) for the workloads.
```

> - control the deployment of runtime artifacts initially required by the TEE during 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Control the deployment of runtime artifacts initially required by the TEE during 
```

  initialisation. 
 These boot images once initialised will receive the workload.

Example : A kubernetes administrator responsible for deploying pods to a cluster and 
maintaining the cluster.

### Workload Provider
This persona designs and creates the orchestration objects comprising the solution (e.g. 

> kubernetes pod descriptions etc). These objects reference containers published by Container  
> Image Providers. In some cases the Workload and Container Image Providers may be the same entity.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
kubernetes pod descriptions etc). These objects reference containers published by Container Image Providers.
In some cases the Workload and Container Image Providers may be the same entity.
```

Something on GH triggers a new line after the word `Container`. I am guessing it is because the next word `Image` starts with caps.

The solution defined is intended to provide the Application or Workload which in turn provides 

> valueto the data owners (customers and clients).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
value to the data owners (customers and clients).
```

The workload provider and data owner could be part of same company/organisation but 
following the least privilege principle the workload provider should not be able to view or 
manipulate end user data without informed consent.
- Need to prove to customer aspects of compliance.
- Defines what the solution requires in order to run and maintain compliance (resources, utility 
  containers/services,  storage).
- Chooses the method of verifying the container images (from those supported by Container Image 
  Provider) and obtains artifacts needed to allow verification to be completed within 
  the TEE.

> - provide the boot images initially required by the TEE during 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Provide the boot images initially required by the TEE during 
```

  initialisation or designates a trusted party to do so.

> - provide the attestation verification service, or designate a trusted party to provide the 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Provide the attestation verification service, or designate a trusted party to provide the 
```

  attestation verification service.

Example : 3rd party software vendor, cloud solution provider

### Container Image Provider

This persona is responsible for the part of the supply chain that builds container images and 
provides them for use by the solution. Since a workload can 
be composed of multiple containers, there may be multiple container image providers, some 
will be closely connected to the workload provider (business logic containers), others more 
independent to the workload provider (side car containers). The container image provider is expected
to use a mechanism to allow provenance of container image to be established when a 
workload pulls in these images at deployment time. This can take the form of signing or encrypting 
the container images.

> - Builds container images

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Builds container images.
```

> - Owner of business logic containers. These may contain proprietary algorithms, models or secrets

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Owner of business logic containers. These may contain proprietary algorithms, models or secrets.
```

> - Signs or encrypts the images

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Signs or encrypts the images.
```

- Defines the methods available for verifying the container images to be used.
- Publishes the signature verification key (public key).
- Provides any decryption keys through a secure channel (generally to a key management system 
  controlled by a Key Broker Service).
- Provides other required verification artifacts (secure channel may be considered).

> - Protects the keys used to sign or encrypt the container images

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Protects the keys used to sign or encrypt the container images.
```

It is recognised that hybrid options exist surrounding workload provider and container provider. 
For example the workload provider may choose to protect their supply chain by 
signing/encrypting their own container images after following the build patterns already 
established by the container image provider. 

Example : Sidecar Container Provider

### Data Owner
Owner of data used, and manipulated by the application.

> - concerned with visibility and integrity of their data.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Concerned with visibility and integrity of their data.
```

> - concerned with compliance and protection of their data.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Concerned with compliance and protection of their data.
```

> - uses and shares data with solutions. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Uses and shares data with solutions. 
```

> - least privilege principle means no visibility or manipulation of data is possible by 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Least privilege principle means no visibility or manipulation of data is possible by 
```

  Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator personas.

## Conclusion

The key trust relationship here is between the Data Owner and the other personas. The Data Owner 
trusts the code in the form of container images chosen by the Workload Provider to operate across 
their data, however they do not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator with their 
data and wish to ensure data confidentiality.

> The Workload Provider must not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator  
> otherwise they risk losing the trust of the data owner. This means the Workload Provider must 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Workload Provider must not trust the Orchestration Operator or Cloud Operator otherwise 
they risk losing the trust of the Data Owner. This means the Workload Provider must
```

Yet again GH has rendered it such that they have added a newline, for no reason at all.

provide assurance to the data owner regarding the integrity of the code and that the data is 
appropriately protected.

The Workload Provider is free to choose Container Image Providers that will provide not only 
the images they need but also support the verification method they require.  A key aspect to this
relationship is the Workload Provider applying Supply Chain 
Security practices (as 
described on Page 42 of
[Cloud Native Security Paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf)
) when considering Container 
Image Providers. So the Container Image Provider must support the Workload Providers 

> ability to provide assurance to the data owner regarding integrity of the code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
ability to provide assurance to the Data Owner regarding integrity of the code.
```

the Workload Provider and the Orchestration Operator.

Outside the TEE we distinguish between the Orchestration Operator and the Infrastructure 
Operator due to nature of how they can impact the TEE and the concerns of Workload Provider and 
Data Owner. Direct threats exist from the Orchestration Operator as some orchestration actions  
must be permitted to cross the TEE boundary otherwise orchestration cannot occur. A key goal is to 
*deprivilege orchestration* and put a persona inside the TEE boundary in control of the 
orchestration operators privileges across the boundary. However indirect threats exist 
from the Infrastructure Operator who would not be permitted to exercise orchestration APIs but 
could exploit the low level hardware or firmware capabilities to access or impact the  contents 
of a TEE.

Inside the TEE we distinguish between the Workload Provider and Data Owner in recognition that 
the same workload (or parts such as logging/monitoring etc) can be re-used with different data 
sets to provide a service/solution. In the case of bespoke workload, the workload provider and 

> data owner may be the same persona. As mentioned the data owner must have a level of 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Data Owner may be the same persona. As mentioned the Data Owner must have a level of 
```

> trust in the workload provider to use and expose the data provided in an expected and approved 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
trust in the Workload Provider to use and expose the data provided in an expected and approved 
```

manner. Page 10 of [A Technical Analysis of Confidential Computing v1.1](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2021/03/CCC-Tech-Analysis-Confidential-Computing-V1.pdf)
, suggests some approaches to establish trust between them.

The TEE boundary allows the introduction of secrets but just as we recognised the 
TEE does not provide protection from code vulnerabilities, we also recognised that a TEE cannot 

> enforce complete distrust between workload provider and data owner. This means secrets within 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
enforce complete distrust between Workload Provider and Data Owner. This means secrets within 
```

> the TEE are at risk from both workload provider and data owner and trying to keep secrets 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the TEE are at risk from both Workload Provider and Data Owner and trying to keep secrets 
```

which protect the workload (container encryption etc), separated from secrets to protect the 
data (data encryption) is not provided simply by using a TEE.

Recognising that Data Owner and Workload Provider are separate personas helps us to 
identify threats to both data and workload independently and to recognise that any solution must 
consider the potential independent nature of these personas.
Two examples of trust between Data Owner and Workload Provider are :
- AI Models which are proprietary and protected requires the workload to be encrypted and not 

>   shared with the Data Owner. In this case secrets private to the workload provider are needed 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  shared with the Data Owner. In this case secrets private to the Workload Provider are needed 
```

>   to access the workload, secrets requiring access to the data are provided by the data owner 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  to access the workload, secrets requiring access to the data are provided by the Data Owner 
```

  while trusting the workload/model without having direct access to how the workload functions. 

>   The data owner completely trusts the workload and workload provider, whereas the workload 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The Data Owner completely trusts the workload and Workload Provider, whereas the Workload
```

>   provider does not trust the data owner with the full details of their workload.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Provider does not trust the Data Owner with the full details of their workload.
```

- Data Owner verifies and approves certain versions of a workload, the workload provides the 
  data owner with secrets in order to fulfil this. These secrets are available in the TEE for 
  use by the Data Owner to verify the workload, once achieved the data owner will then provide 
  secrets and data into the TEE for use by the workload in full confidence of what the workload 

>   will do with their data. The data owner will independently verify versions of the workload and 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  will do with their data. The Data Owner will independently verify versions of the workload and 
```

>   will only trust specific versions of the workload with the data whereas the workload provider 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  will only trust specific versions of the workload with the data whereas the Workload Provider
```

>   completely trusts the data owner.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  completely trusts the Data Owner.
```

We do not draw a distinction between data owner and end user though we do recognise that in 
some cases these may not be identical. For example data may be provided to a workload to allow 
analysis and results to be made available to an end user. The original data is never provided 
directly to the end user but the derived data is, in this case the data owner can be different 
from the end user and may wish to protect this data from the end user.

> 
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

  services (Logging/Monitoring/Load Balancing) for the workloads.
- Control the deployment of runtime artifacts initially required by the TEE during 
  initialisation. 
 These boot images once initialised will receive the workload.

Example : A kubernetes administrator responsible for deploying pods to a cluster and 
maintaining the cluster.

### Workload Provider
This persona designs and creates the orchestration objects comprising the solution (e.g. 
kubernetes pod descriptions etc). These objects reference containers published by Container Image Providers.
In some cases the Workload and Container Image Providers may be the same entity.
The solution defined is intended to provide the Application or Workload which in turn provides 
value to the data owners (customers and clients).
The workload provider and data owner could be part of same company/organisation but 
following the least privilege principle the workload provider should not be able to view or 
manipulate end user data without informed consent.
- Need to prove to customer aspects of compliance.
- Defines what the solution requires in order to run and maintain compliance (resources, utility 

>   containers/services,  storage).

Reviewer 2: is it the container image provider who defines/locks the image config (e.g., cmd/entrypoint) that is only allowed to be used during runtime?

Author: Mm interesting question,
I guess for me the Workload Provider needs to which containers to use and in theory should be testing the solution out. So they will be defining what can run and how it can run including any image config.

To be honest I think this would be something to think about further, what can a Container image provider do and a workload provider chooses to inherit v what a workload provider can do regardless of the Container Image provider.
From a trust perspective the workload provider needs have the final say, but the mechanics of how to do say may need work from container image providers which the workload provider chooses to trust.

What thinking already exists within a kubernetes context today to lock the config such as cmd/entrypoint? Happy to be pointed to educate myself better.

Reviewer 6: > To be honest I think this would be something to think about further, what can a Container image provider do and a workload provider chooses to inherit v what a workload provider can do regardless of the Container Image provider. From a trust perspective the workload provider needs have the final say, but the mechanics of how to do say may need work from container image providers which the workload provider chooses to trust.

Hmm... from a compliance perspective, I would also add the data owner into the mix. The data owner need to assure all regulatory requirements when using the data. So does it inherit what the persona gets from workload/container image owner (need for measurements?).
